Transaction and execution doc (#44)
substrate-developer-hub/docs-sandbox: source/docs/main-docs/02-fundamentals/transaction.md

Transactions in Substrate can be considered as any piece of data to be included in a block.
They can be one of 3 distinct types, all of which fall under a broader category called  "extrinsics"-i.e. any information that originates from _outside_ a runtime.
These are:

* **Signed transactions**: must contain the signature of an account sending an inbound request to execute some runtime call.
  With a signed transaction, the account used to submit the request typically pays a transaction fee and must sign it using the account's private key.
* **Unsigned transactions**: do not identify the sender of the inbound request and do not require any signature.
  With an unsigned transaction, there's no economic deterrent to prevent spam or replay attacks, so custom logic is required to protect the network from these types of transactions being misused.

> * **Inherents**: are a special type of unsigned transaction made by block authors which carry information required to build a block such as timestamps, storage proofs and uncle blocks.

Author: Make its own page called transaction types. Give examples of where we use each transaction type in Substrate. 
E.g. Balances extrinsic, unsigned, block author (non-determinstic). (explaining why).

Understanding how signed and unsigned transactions are formatted, validated and executed provides an important foundation on the design of the extrinsic types and behaviors available in Substrate.
Any signed or unsigned transaction that's sent to a [non-authoring node]() will just be gossiped to other nodes in the network and enter their transaction pool until it is received by an authoring node.

[ maybe diagram here ? ]

### Extrinsics in a block produced locally

If a signed or unsigned transaction is included in a block produced by the local node, its lifecycle follows a path like this:

1. Some node listens for transactions on the network.
1. The node receives a JSON-RPC request for a signed transaction.
1. The transaction gets formatted in the runtime, with its corresponding function call, signature, nonce, tip and additional information.
1. Some runtime API is used for the client to verify that the transaction meets its requirements and is valid.
1. Only if the transaction is valid will it be put in a transaction queue ready for block authors.
1. Once in the ready queue, the same runtime API is used to order the transaction according to some priority factor.

> 1. The node uses transactions in this queue to construct a block and propagate it to peers over the network.

Author: Turn into one sentence.

Notice that transactions are not removed from the ready queue when blocks are authored, but removed _only_ on block import.
This is due to the possibility that a recently-authored block might not make it into the canonical chain.
Inherents don't follow the same execution path: they are included in every block without fail.

### Extrinsics in a block received from network

1. The node receives notification of the new block.
1. Other nodes also construct this block and publish it to the network.
1. A 2/3 majority of nodes reach consensus that this block is part of the canonical chain.
1. All other nodes on the network receive and build the block.

> 1. All transactions in that block are executed and state changes are updated in runtime storage.

Author: Turn into one sentence.

## Validating and queuing transactions

As discussed in [Consensus](), a majority of nodes in the network must agree on the state of the blockchain to continue securely adding blocks.

> To reach consensus, two-thirds of the nodes must agree on the order of the transactions executed and the resulting state change. 

Author: ```suggestion
To reach consensus, two-thirds of the nodes must agree on the relevant block.
```

> To prepare for consensus, transactions are first validated and queued on the local node in a **transaction pool**.
> This is where all signed and unsigned transactions that have been received by a local node are placed before they get broadcast to the rest of the network.
> Before including a transaction in a block, nodes must first determine which transactions are valid and in what order of priority it should be included.

Author: ```suggestion
Before including a transaction in a block, nodes must first determine which transactions are valid and in what order of priority it should be included.
```

### Validating transactions

> A runtime defines rules that determine the validity of any transaction type. 

Author: Simplify. Example: The transaction pool knows the validity of the transactions.

This tagging system gives nodes just enough information to know whether a transaction provides the data required by the runtime.

Using these runtime-defined rules, the local node's transaction pool checks that the transactions received meets specific conditions and whether it should be included in a block or not.

For example, the transaction pool might perform the following checks to determine whether a transaction meets certain requirements:

* Is the transaction index—also referred to as the transaction nonce—correct?
* Does the account used to sign the transaction have enough funds to pay the associated fees?
* Is the signature used to sign the transaction valid?

After the initial validity check, the transaction pool periodically checks whether existing transactions in the pool are still valid.
If a transaction is found to be invalid or has expired, it is dropped from the pool.

The transaction pool only deals with the validity of the transaction and the ordering of valid transaction that are placed in a transaction queue.
All other transaction details—including handling for fees, accounts, or signatures—are defined by the runtime using the `validate_transaction` function.

> For more detailed information about validating transactions, see the [`validate_transaction`](/rustdocs/latest/sp_transaction_pool/runtime_api/trait.TaggedTransactionQueue.html#method.validate_transaction) runtime API method.

Author: Say: the specific details on how the validation works can be found in the validate_transaction function.

### Adding valid transactions to a transaction queue

> If a transaction is identified as valid, the transaction pool moves the transaction into a queue. 

Author: ```suggestion
If a transaction is identified as valid, the transaction **pool** moves the transaction into a **queue**. 
```

There are two separate transaction queues for valid transactions.

* The **ready queue**: contains transactions that can be included in a new pending block.
  For runtimes built with FRAME, the transactions must follow the exact order in the ready queue.

* The **future queue**: contains transactions that may become valid in the future.
  For example, a transaction may have a `nonce` that is too high for its account, in which case the transaction will wait in the future queue until the valid preceding transactions are included in the chain, after which it will be either dropped or reconsidered.
  

> It's possible to design a custom runtime to remove the transaction ordering requirements.
> However, a runtime without strict transaction ordering would allow full nodes to implement different strategies for propagating transactions and including them in blocks. 

Author: ```suggestion
It's possible to design a custom runtime to remove the transaction ordering requirements, but this is outside the scope of this document. Learn more [here]().
```
